Queries (#3)
temporalio/edu-interacting-with-workflows-typescript: querying-your-workflows/developing-queries.md

# Developing Queries

> 

Author: Great suggestion - added it to the 'what is a query' chapter

## Defining a Query

A Query is used to access the state of a Workflow without impacting its execution. Similar to defining a Signal in the previous chapter, we first need to define the Query.

Each Query in Temporal is identified by a unique name, referred to as a _Query type_. This name is a string and allows the Client to request specific data from the Workflow.

The arguments you pass into the Query must be serializable.

To define a Query in the Temporal Workflow, you will need to use the [`defineQuery`](https://typescript.temporal.io/api/namespaces/workflow/#definequery) method provided by the TypeScript API. This method specifies the Query's structure, including its name and the types of arguments it expects.

```typescript
import { defineQuery } from "@temporalio/workflow";

export const getValueQuery = defineQuery<number | undefined, [string]>(
  "getValue"
);
```

> In the code example above, the `getValueQuery` will return a number or undefined, and the argument type of the query is a string. The Query type is `getValue`.

Author: done

> In the code example above, the `getValueQuery` will return a number or undefined, and the argument type of the query is a string. The Query type is `getValue`.

Author: changed

> In the code example above, we first import `defineQuery` from our SDK before defining the Query. The `getValueQuery` will return a number or undefined. The argument type of the query is a string. The Query type is the name we've given the Query, in this case, `getValue`.

Author: Fixed

## Handling a Query

After defining a Query, the next step is to establish how the Workflow handles incoming Queries. This is where Query handlers come into play - they specify the actions a Workflow should take upon receiving a Query.

> To reiterate, your Query should not include any logic that causes Command generation (such as executing Activities). Remember, Queries are intended to be read-only operations that do not alter the Workflow's state. Including such logic causes unexpected behavior.

Reviewer: Do we not block this somehow at the SDK level? That's actually surprising, knowing that this would be *possible*!

Author: Yeah according to docs! 

"A Query must never mutate the state of the Workflow Execution—that is, Queries are read-only and cannot contain any blocking code." (https://docs.temporal.io/workflows#query)

Reviewer 2: I believe we do in some SDKs, but not yet in TS. This was actually a very difficult thing to assert until recently, because of the way that Core would pass jobs to the language counterpart. But I think that we'll probably fix that in 1.10.

> You will use the [`handleQuery`](https://typescript.temporal.io/api/interfaces/workflow.WorkflowInboundCallsInterceptor/#handlequery) method to handle Queries inside a Workflow. A Query handler can receive arguments and must return a value. Here is an example:

Reviewer 3: I would test this in every language and make sure. Different SDKs may behave differently.

> You will use the [`handleQuery`](https://typescript.temporal.io/api/interfaces/workflow.WorkflowInboundCallsInterceptor/#handlequery) method to handle Queries inside a Workflow. A Query handler can receive arguments and must return a value. Here is an example:

Author: Nice! Thanks!

```typescript
export async function trackState(): Promise<void> {
  const state = new Map<string, number>();
  setHandler(setValueSignal, (key, value) => void state.set(key, value));
  setHandler(getValueQuery, (key) => state.get(key));
}
```

> The above example sets up a handler for the `getValueQuery` we defined earlier. When this Query is invoked, it retrieves the value associated with the provided key from our state map.

Reviewer 3: Dail was big on not using directional referencing (above, below, etc.) in case something changes.
```suggestion
This example sets up a handler for the `getValueQuery` we defined earlier. When this Query is invoked, it retrieves the value associated with the provided key from our state map.
```

Author: Thanks for letting me know :) Will avoid directional referencing! Fixed

# Developing Queries

> A Query is a synchronous operation that is used to get the state of a Workflow Execution. Queries are sent from a Temporal Client to a Workflow Execution. Once a Query is issued, the Client waits for a response from the Workflow. Although Queries are typically used to access the state of an open (running) Workflow Execution, it is also possible to send a Query to a closed Workflow Execution. In either case, there must be at least one Worker for that Workflow Type currently running and it must use the same Task Queue as the Client.

Reviewer 2: Workers are per Task Queues, not per Workflow Type. Also, the Client don't "have a Task Queue", nor is one provided when sending a Query.

```suggestion
A Query is a synchronous operation that is used to get the state of a Workflow Execution. Queries are sent from a Temporal Client to a Workflow Execution. Once a Query is issued, the Client waits for a response from the Workflow. Although Queries are typically used to access the state of an open (running) Workflow Execution, it is also possible to send a Query to a closed Workflow Execution. In either case, there must be at least one running Worker for the Task Queue to which that Workflow belongs.
```

The Query is identified at both ends by a Query Type. The Workflow must have a Query handler to process the Query and provide data that represents the requested information. Queries will return the most recent state of the Workflow Execution. This means that the data will reflect the state of all confirmed Events (an Event is confirmed if the call creating the Event returned a success) that came in just before the Query was sent. If the Event is created while the Query is being the performed, this may not be reflected in the Workflow state the Query is based on.

> Also, a single Workflow can potentially support multiple Queries each serving a specific purpose. For example, a pizza order Workflight might support one Query (identified by the Query Type `getElapsedOrderMinutes`) which returns the number of minutes since the order was received. Simultaneously, another Query (identified by the Query Type `getDeliveryAddress`) might return the location to which the pizzas should be delivered. By leveraging multiple Queries, developers can design highly responsive systems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also, a single Workflow can potentially support multiple Queriy Types, each serving a specific purpose. For example, a pizza order Workflight might support one Query (identified by the Query Type `getElapsedOrderMinutes`) which returns the number of minutes since the order was received. Simultaneously, another Query (identified by the Query Type `getDeliveryAddress`) might return the location to which the pizzas should be delivered. By leveraging multiple Queries, developers can design highly responsive systems.
```

There are two steps for adding support for a Query to your Workflow code:

1. Defining the Query Type (name) - Specify the identifier that a Temporal Client can use to request a specific piece of information.
2. Handling the Query - Write the code which, when invoked upon receiving the Query request, will provide the information to the Temporal Client.

## Defining a Query

A Query is used to access the state of a Workflow without impacting its execution. Similar to defining a Signal in the previous chapter, we first need to define the Query.

> Each Query in Temporal is identified by a unique name, referred to as a _Query type_. This name is a string and allows the Client to request specific data from the Workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each Query in Temporal is identified by a unique name, referred to as a _Query Type_. This name is a string and allows the Client to request specific data from the Workflow.
```

The arguments you pass into the Query must be serializable.

> To define a Query in the Temporal Workflow, you will need to use the [`defineQuery`](https://typescript.temporal.io/api/namespaces/workflow/#definequery) method provided by the TypeScript API. This method, which returns a function used to handle the query, specifies the Query's structure. The call to defineQuery includes the Query's name, return values and types, input parameter and type, and the Query Type that a Client will use to send the Query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To define a Query in the Temporal Workflow, you will need to use the [`defineQuery`](https://typescript.temporal.io/api/namespaces/workflow/#definequery) method provided by the TypeScript API. This function returns a `QueryDefinition` object, which carries the Query's signature. That includes the Query Type, the input parameters types, and the Query's return type.
```

```typescript
import { defineQuery } from "@temporalio/workflow";

export const getValueQuery = defineQuery<number | undefined, [string]>(
  "getValue"
);
```

In the code example above, here are the steps for declaring a Query handler:

1. Import `defineQuery` from our SDK before defining the Query

> 2. Declare the `getValueQuery` function

Reviewer 2: `defineQuery` returns an opaque object, not a function. Even though it is common for Query Types to look like getters, they are not.

> 3. Call the `defineQuery` method, which creates the `getValueQuery` function

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Call the `defineQuery` method, which creates the `getValueQuery` object
```

4. Define the return value for the Query handler, which in this example, is a number or undefined.
5. Define the input parameter for the Query handler which is always of type string.
6. Define the Query Type (the unique identifier for this type of Query) which is, in this case, `getValue`.

## Handling a Query

After defining a Query, the next step is to establish how the Workflow handles incoming Queries. This is where Query handlers come into play - they specify the actions a Workflow should take upon receiving a Query.

To reiterate, your Query should not include any logic that causes Command generation (such as executing Activities). Remember, Queries are intended to be read-only operations that do not alter the Workflow's state. Including such logic causes unexpected behavior.

You will use the [`handleQuery`](https://typescript.temporal.io/api/interfaces/workflow.WorkflowInboundCallsInterceptor/#handlequery) method to handle Queries inside a Workflow. A Query handler can receive arguments and return a value. Here is an example:

```typescript
export async function trackState(): Promise<void> {
  const state = new Map<string, number>();

>   setHandler(setValueSignal, (key, value) => void state.set(key, value));

Reviewer 2: Why include an example of `setHandler` for a signal here? Seems confusing for students.
